[Music]
welcome to the Ted interview I'm Chris
Anderson
this is the Poker series where I sit
down with the Ted speaker and we get to
dive much deeper into their ideas than
was possible during their Ted Talk
today's guest is something of a personal
hero David Deutsch he's a physicist and
author he has a reputation of being
something of a reclusive genius he lives
by himself in a home in Oxford working
late into the night trying to unpack
really the deepest Mysteries of the
cosmos
his thinking has really had a dramatic
impact on how I see the world here's the
thing most scientists would tell you
that human beings aren't just that
significant we are just this little
speck of dust and a random planet in an
obscure part of the universe
David Deutsch says that's wrong
he actually says people matter and the
reason they matter is that they are
incubating something knowledge
in David's view knowledge is a force of
almost unlimited power in the universe
and also a force that will determine our
future
live and we can fail to survive
it depends
and chance
create the relevant knowledge in time
the overwhelming majority of all species
and all civilizations that have ever
existed are now history and if we want
to be the exception to that then
logically our only hope is to make use
of the one feature that distinguishes
our species and our civilization from
all the others namely our ability to
create new explanations new knowledge to
be a hub of existence
David's thinking about knowledge has had
a huge impact on me personally in a book
called the fabric of reality David
argued that the way in which we think of
knowledge is broken up into all these
different fields is misguided actually
all of knowledge is connected and if we
spent a bit more time understanding
those connections understanding the
context of what we know that is where
real understanding comes from where the
real breakthroughs come from
believe it or not I honestly think it
was reading that book that finally gave
me the courage 18 years ago to leave my
company and take over leadership of Ted
which back then was an annual conference
in California devoted to Bringing
together technology entertainment and
Design
you see if Deutsche was right the
sharing of accessible knowledge between
different disciplines wasn't just a
short-term fad and wasn't just limited
to those three subjects it was something
the world would always need so he
inspired me to take the leap and here we
are and honestly David it's an honor to
be speaking with you today welcome well
it's very nice to be here and thanks for
the for the dramatic introduction I'm
very glad to hear it
so David in the first Ted Talk you gave
you had this phrase that you quoted
really from Stephen Hawking Stephen
Hawking referred to humans as basically
chemical scum on the surface of an
obscure planet and that's actually quite
a common view of how science is thought
of as treating humans you know we
started thinking we were the scent of
everything and then we gradually
discovered that no we're just a planet
revolving around a star and then that
star is just one of 100 billion in a
galaxy and that Galaxy is one of
hundreds of billions of other galaxies
and goodness knows we become very
quickly completely insignificant
you I think disagree with that
characterization explain why and you're
right that's the prevailing View
because that's the view that's kind of
forced on us by a narrow conception of
what science is
according to that view
you classify things in the universe in a
sort of hierarchy of more massive and
Powerful versus less massive and so on
and so we're used to the fact that the
big objects like the supermassive black
holes in in the center of a galaxy
affect a star can rip a star to Pieces
but the star being ripped to pieces
hardly affects the supermassive black
hole and it's the same with the sun and
the solar system you know the sun
affects the Earth but the Earth barely
affects the Sun and so on but the funny
thing is on Earth on the surface of the
Earth
everything's the other way around
everywhere you look you see the effects
of life on Earth and life every living
thing that you see is is the result of
the action of a single molecule
or two molecules or something depending
on what kind of
um organism it is so this submicroscopic
entity
commands vast resources now humans take
this to our wholly different level where
we are capable of becoming cosmically
significant not just dominating the
surface of a planet but dominating the
Galaxy and further out
well how's that you mean by by kind of
Star Trek like exploration or something
else yes Star Trek uh or rather
colonization
it's it's what we do
um humans evolved unlike all other
existing organisms
to find new
environments which are initially lethal
to them and to change the environment
such that they can live comfortably
there
I am sitting in Oxford
and if it weren't for technology I would
die
within hours
because without clothes Without Shelter
without medical attention without
sources of food from far away I would be
very hard put to it to forage and the
the territory here supported only a tiny
number of people in the early days of
our species whereas now it supports tens
of millions and so the difference
between your survival and otherwise is
human knowledge turned into technology
which has built you know the house the
central heating the clothes and so forth
that that keep you alive yes
fundamentally it's knowledge and I mean
when you talk about you know like that
humans can have indefinite impact on the
universe through Star Trek like
expansion out like at first glance a lot
of people listen to that will say well
already that's sounding a little silly
that's science fiction anyway and and
how can that possibly mean much but your
whole second book this idea of the
beginning of infinity is arguing that
knowledge in principle has infinite
reach and therefore if you don't include
that in your world view you are missing
out on something fundamentally important
so talk a bit more about how we could
think of that reach of knowledge perhaps
it's uh more Illuminating to think of
this the other way around so Suppose
there were some extraterrestrial beings
intelligent being things looking around
at the stars from let's say a hundred
light years away or something in the
galaxy and they would see various stars
and they they might use astrophysics to
predict what these Stars will do but
on Earth they would detect something
for example the fact that there's oxygen
in the atmosphere which tells them that
there's life here
and then they would detect if if they
kept watching the ass for a while I mean
I I'm kind of imagining them with
technology similar to ours they could
detect more if they had better
technology but if they watched the Earth
for a couple of decades they would see
that the mean temperature of the planet
is changing faster than it possibly
could
only artificial intervention can change
the temperature of the earth as fast as
it has been changing this is
inexplicable without the presence of
intelligent beings and if they then ask
themselves well this influence the
influence that affected the atmosphere
of that planet
could it possibly affect us and the
answer is yes because
the issue of whether a spaceship can get
there
is a matter of what we decide to do and
it's also a matter of the laws of
physics
so David I think it's important almost
having this conversation to you know
bear in mind that the way you think but
by thinking in sort of theoretical terms
about what knowledge might in principle
one day do that has implications for how
we should think of human beings and um
our role in the world and so when we
talk about aliens and we talk about
um you know the potential for
exploration you're not saying that hey
this is going to happen anytime soon
what you're saying is it is in principle
possible for this species that has
evolved on Earth
to have a future that is imaginable it
may not happen but it is imaginable
where it can become indefinitely more
influential in our solar system
eventually maybe our galaxy it may be
beyond that and so it's it's that fact
that that is possible in principle
which creates this anchor this
fundamental idea that knowledge there's
no limit to how powerful an influence it
can eventually have starting with Oxford
and Central Heating and moving out in
theory indefinitely Beyond and that that
is a remarkable fact that needs
explaining
yes uh I mean you asked about the cosmic
significance so the answer that I give
to explain it in some sense must involve
things Beyond everyday life but everyday
life as we see it would have been
regarded as completely magical even a
few centuries ago let alone for the most
of the period of the human species for
example you know I I can sit in Oxford
and look a bit beyond my house and look
up in the sky and I see an airplane
there now the fact that a metallic
object weighing a hundred tons is flying
there at 500 miles an hour and has come
from another continent that is as much
of a jump from natural
human beings as what we're discussing
this kind of space travel space
exploration is from where we are now in
in fact I think comparing those two I I
I I guess we have already come further
in terms of knowledge than what lies
between us and space exploration I'm not
saying exploring the Galaxy that would
require more knowledge but that's all it
requires you know if if you're a
scientist and you're asked is so and so
possible you have to use the laws of
nature you can't say well my intuition
is that that will never happen because
our knowledge of the laws of nature is
far superior to our intuition which
after all was formed in the past and was
formed in a very narrow set of
circumstances
and so this is really a a radical
counter view to what I would say is even
a traditional biologist view which is
that
um we should be more humble as a species
you know yes we have um our
extraordinary skills but frankly every
species has its extraordinary skills
we're good at language and we can build
these amazing things but you know an
elephant has thousands of muscles in its
trunk and the Exquisite way in which it
can manipulate that that's like nothing
else we can do ants and bees have these
extraordinary social lives every species
is actually in a very real sense equally
evolved as we are because it's been
evolving for exactly as long from the
original source of life on Earth so
there is no special status in biology to
humans and um and we should we should
come off our high horse now the
implication of what you're saying is
actually that's not quite right that
knowledge which somehow became part of
the human evolutionary story at some
point is special and allows this
particular species to do things that are
not just a different kind of thing from
others but different in principle yes
um first of all what gives living things
their miraculous power compared with
non-living things compared with most of
the things in the universe is likewise
just knowledge knowledge is encoded in
what is really a computer program in the
DNA molecule ah so in your articulation
of it knowledge is something much
broader than a world view that is that
is encoded in a human mind it's much
broader that's right knowledge isn't
just a matter of relief and it's it's
not just a matter sort of human
psychology it is information that has
causal power
knowledge is information that has a
causal power that's that's a beautifully
crisp definition
about three or four definitions of
knowledge in in my thinking about this
and and that's my present one
I get this more General concept of
Knowledge from the philosopher Carl
Poppa who spoke of knowledge without a
knowing subject
and the two main types of knowledge that
he was interested in was scientific
knowledge in human Minds on the one hand
and knowledge in the form of adaptations
in genes of living organisms on the
other hand now that second type of
knowledge is not knowledge in a knowing
subject but nevertheless it's
information that is
spectacularly honed for its ability to
cause physical effects so the genes for
the eye can cause physical effects of
focusing which can then change the
trajectory of the animal which can then
make it kill another animal or escape
from another animal and so on
and the program in DNA has punched above
its weight by a vast Factor now humans
can transcend that in at least two ways
one is that the amount of information in
our brains
is vastly more than the amount in our
DNA
so the DNA has built up knowledge by
Evolution and so on but we have added to
that
both by culture and by individual
thinking and the Brain simply holds more
bits of inflammation than DNA does and
the other thing is which is more
important that humans have a different
kind of knowledge namely humans have
explanatory knowledge humans have
understanding
and I argue in my second book that
explanatory knowledge is the stuff that
has infinite reach it it seems unlikely
that biological evolution could ever
let's say move an animal to the Moon and
back
but we know that human type knowledge
explanatory knowledge can do that so
that's really powerful so what happened
at some point along the evolutionary
chain
these Minds were created that were
capable of a different more powerful
kind of knowledge and explanatory
knowledge so this this seems to me to
come right then to the heart of why
you believe we are not just chemical
scum and and I I to me
it's a profoundly inspiring view in many
ways of how we can think of who we are
which is that for whatever reason we
have found ourselves in this moment in
history where we have embarked on a
journey that has potentially unlimited
reach it could lead us to literally
anywhere there is no dream that in
principle humans couldn't dream of being
part of and it may maybe it's not us in
the end it's some successor species or
but we are part of
um a liftoff that has no limit in
principle well it has the limits of the
laws of physics other than the laws of
physics I think it's a very striking
View humans evolve the ability to do
what you've just said at least a hundred
thousand years ago right but for various
reasons didn't use it now in much the
same way
the whole universe starting 14 points
something billion years ago
um for the first billion years or so all
sorts of new things were happening a
supermassive black holes were forming
galaxies were forming a hydrogen was
ionized and deionized and then new
elements were formed and so on
after about a billion I think it's about
a billion years I could I could be wrong
some something like that nothing new
happened in the cosmos
uh stars stars uh were formed they
exploded planetary systems were formed
new elements the same new elements were
were spewed into the into the
interplanetary gas again and again and
again and it was just boring for about
13 billion years
and then
creativity happened
and we are at the phase change where
things are from now on and that is if we
play our cards right if it's not might
not happen or someone else might do it
but this phase change changes the whole
nature of the cosmos for example
in the first 14 billion years
the rule was that big things affect
small things and small things do not
affect big things much
after the phase change
everything is determined by small things
small things affect large things and and
what is the determining factor is not
mass or power or energy
but information and specifically the
kind of information that has physical
effects namely knowledge well that's the
most thrilling uh history of the
universe I've actually ever heard but
you used a word in there that I I need
you to explain now you said 13 billion
years 12 billion of those were boring
then creativity happened so what was
creativity and how did it happen
well human type creativity
is different from the creativity of
the biosphere
in that human creativity can form models
of the world that say not only what will
happen but why so an explanation for
example is something that captures an
aspect of the world that is unseen
so explanations explain the scene in
terms of the Unseen
whereas biological knowledge it's only
what works the eye is like a camera
because it gradually moved towards that
shape because the animals that had a
worse shape didn't survive as well right
but a camera
is shaped by the laws of Optics okay so
the reason for the existence of a camera
is because
some human somewhere had this
explanatory Theory based on these ideas
about the invisible these ideas about
Optics exactly about physics about how
light works and by using that pattern of
ideas that allowed them to build cameras
and then a lot more beyond that that's
right that is what allows human type
knowledge to have this
Universal reach whereas biological
knowledge although it has enormous reach
as you said it can make elephants Trunks
and and giraffes necks and so on it is
actually limited because of the type of
knowledge that it is for example
to evolve from one animal to another
over let's say a thousand Generations
every single generation must be viable
as an animal
because the DNA strands have to be able
to just replicate in every single
generation and if one of them fails if
one of them doesn't work then the
species will go extinct whereas humans
as the philosopher Karl Popper said we
can let our ideas die in our place and
that means that we can go through a
whole bunch of a sequence of ideas that
aren't viable
on the way from one viable idea to the
next we don't have to die when they're
wrong
what was the key thing that happened
though in human history or in human
evolution that allowed this type of
expansionary knowledge to take off
almost certainly this dates back to our
ancestor species a species before humans
also had the capacity for explanatory
knowledge I believe and also our cousin
species like like neanderthals and I
have a rather heterodox theory of why we
have this ability namely it's needed to
pass on cultural knowledge this is what
Richard Dawkins calls memes we evolve
cultural knowledge which is memes
instead of genes and they can evolve
thousands of times faster
so what happened at some point hundreds
of thousands of years ago was that um
hominid mines evolved the ability to um
mimic each other you would see a passion
in another mind and you would you would
copy it and that and that created a
replication process that was massively
faster than traditional reproduction and
it allowed multiple things to be
explored essentially and some of those
started to work the first thing that
happened even before that that there are
some species still today like
chimpanzees and so on that have memes
and they replicate the meme from one
individual to another by literally by
blind replication they they have mirror
neurons and that kind of infrastructure
in their brain which allows them to
mimic what another chimpanzee is doing
now our ancestors somehow latched on to
the evolutionary advantage of having
memes but they both vastly increased the
memory but then they also evolved
creativity because humans copy other
humans by completely different method to
what's used by say chimpanzees humans
don't copy the behavior they copy the
meaning of the behavior
so you you can watch someone doing
something let's say opening you know
you're you're a safe cracker and you're
you're secretly watching someone opening
their safe and you you look at the
combination that they enter and then
they turn one wheel and another wheel
now you might go there and do the same
thing
or you might open the safe buy a
different method yeah you know you might
be lowered in like in some of those
films you might be lowered in from the
Skylight and have to turn the knobs with
your feet
now a chimpanzee could not do that
because that's not copying the behavior
that's just copying the meaning of the
behavior but to humans it's second
nature to copy the meaning in in fact if
you go to a lecture
and you understand what's in the lecture
you might go and tell someone else but
almost certainly not in the same words
that the lecturer used
you would explain it in your own words
if you understood it and if you didn't
understand it then you might explain it
in the same words that the lecturer used
you might say well the lecture said so
but I don't know what the hell he was
talking about can you tell me
got it so so let me put this together
and see if I've I've got this right so
some of our ancestor species develop
this ability to copy memes memes by the
way like the term is now used often just
to mean sort of Internet images or
animations that take off and are spread
virally which is a very narrow uh
interpretation of Richard Dawkins
original intention which is a meme is is
anything that can be copied from brain
to brain whether it's it's an idea a
phrase a poem a piece of music anything
that can be copied is a meme and so this
took off as a sort of biological ability
in our ancestors and then at some point
it shifted to a whole gear where where
it wasn't direct copy of a behavior that
meaning of what was underlay some of
these activities started to get copied
and that's the moment when I guess you
would say that understanding comes into
the equation there someone is
understanding someone else's intent or
action yes and doing something based on
that understanding and understanding is
is I think everything almost in your
your view of the the world I mean say a
bit more about what it is to understand
something
I use the term understanding and
explanation almost interchangeably an
explanation is something that explains
what you see in terms of what you don't
see it explains what might happen in
terms of General ideas about what can
happen
so understanding transcends the initial
application of what it's for let's say
you you initially learn how to throw a
ball from one person to another for fun
or you throw it as a weapon or something
like that but then later someone can ask
what path does the ball take and then
that may allow them to construct a
better weapon or a better defense or a
million other things in future
Generations which all depend on the
meaning
and may have nothing to do with the
original application
but I should add that this initial burst
of understanding or creativity into the
world was blighted by the fact that
memes tend to evolve like genes memes
tend to evolve to breed true that is
memes which can get themselves
Faithfully copied
are preferred to ones which can't so
regardless of whether they're true or
not regardless right that that's their
tendency that's that what they tend to
do
and so initially
creativity was used only for copying
ideas Faithfully which is almost the
opposite use of what we consider
creativity to be used for today which is
to improve upon ideas
this is why our ancestors spent a
hundred thousand years basically doing
nothing
before very very slowly
they changed their lifestyle
first better tools and so on and then
Agriculture and civilization and so on
but still
improvements were extremely rare so that
most
people most humans did not experience
any Improvement in their lifetime and so
what's an example of a meme that could
be reproduced but is basically not true
does not conform with you know it
doesn't it doesn't give any value to
helping someone understand the world
better
uh well I I mean the the Richard
dawkins's favorite example of this and
maybe the reason why he introduced the
concept is religions uh I mean you you
don't have to be an atheist to
understand that most religions are memes
and that they are false
so it could be that there's you know let
me concede that there could be one
religion that's true but that would mean
that the others are false but also much
more prosaically and I guess importantly
we don't expect any of our knowledge to
be completely true
uh you know Newton's laws were thought
to be the last word in mechanics and
gravity and Dynamics and so on for
hundreds of years and then they were
overturned in quick succession by
Einstein's relativity and by quantum
theory and now we know that they are
false now they are still knowledge
knowledge doesn't have to be true it
just has to contain some truth enough to
be useful and so the key one of the key
contributors then to this takeoff was
the development of processes that could
distinguish between memes that were just
reproducing and memes that actually were
closer to the truth in other words there
was this error correcting mechanism
started to take off yes so there we have
we have to jump forward like a hundred
thousand years or some hundreds of
thousands of years to the Scientific
Revolution
it's rather arbitrary where you date it
to some some people might say the
Renaissance was the beginning uh of it
and and I think that this Renaissance or
revolution or Enlightenment as I call it
tried to happen several times in human
history right back to Antiquity and in
each case the uh static type memes which
prevent
innovation
won the battle
and sometimes it lasted one generation
sometimes it lasted two generations like
in ancient Athens or something and then
with the Scientific Revolution it took
hold and it has now been around for
depending on how you count it it's been
around for 300 years 400 years something
like that
and has been exponentially improving
ever since
so this is really interesting to me I
think it's easy to see just how big a
deal this is that in a way you had a
species that for hundreds of thousands
of years had developed this
extraordinary ability to have a mental
life but it was effectively running
around in random directions not making
real progress because there was no way
of saying this is actually the way
forward and what you're describing is
what science did was it said it found a
way of gradually cutting out the
negative signals where where someone was
running into a brick wall or running
backwards and saying no no cut that out
move and and so that that creates this
process whereby we gradually start to
get closer to an understanding of quote
reality unquote I mean even without the
quotes even without the questions it
really is an understanding there really
is a reality out there and and it
matters that we slowly start to model it
in some ways in in our minds now error
correction is an extremely simple
concept although very profound I mean
absolutely everything depends on it
since everything depends on knowledge
and knowledge doesn't come to us on a
silver platter so everything depends on
error correction but although that's a
simple fact
arranging for that to happen is not at
all simple it's incredibly sophisticated
we do not understand it so we don't
understand it either on the level of how
creativity works
in a single human mind
and we also don't understand
what it takes in a culture for the
culture to support error correction
because it's almost paradoxical what we
want is a system for correcting
traditional knowledge but tradition by
definition is something that stays the
same over generations and so Karl Popper
coined the phrase a tradition of
criticism
this is an extremely unusual form of
tradition
it's happened very rarely in human
history and the one we call the
Scientific Revolution is the is the
ancestor of everything good we have
today
but we don't know what it takes
for a culture to have a tradition of
criticism in it now we are very lucky
and we take for granted that we have
things like the scientific Community the
scientific tradition we we take for
granted that if a professor is asked a
question in a seminar and says you're
not allowed to ask that just trust me
I'm the professor he will be laughed at
although there are many areas of life
where he wouldn't be laughed at but
science is one
where it's taken for granted that
criticism is part of the culture it's
part of the tradition that's passed on
and so in many ways it it's it's a
miracle that this ever happened and that
there's a sort of a fragility to it I
mean I think I think it's your view that
this type of knowledge liftoff almost
happened or started to happen at other
times in human history perhaps yes uh
during the Greek civilization and um and
then we we lost it
um how fragile is what we have right now
um we can't know because our
Enlightenment is the first one that's
lasted for more than two or three
generations I don't think it got to
where it is by accident I think there is
some stability to it it didn't get to
where it is today by not being stable
on the other hand there definitely is no
guarantee we could choose to end it we
could do the wrong thing repeatedly and
end it just one thing though I I would
like to say that when people compare our
civilization to other civilizations that
have lasted for centuries or whatever
and then collapsed and they compare ours
with theirs like you know it was caused
by losing self-confidence and then the
Barbarians at the gates and that kind of
thing I think that's wrong because none
of the other
long-lived civilizations in history
has had a tradition of criticism so it's
obvious that they were fragile they were
fragile precisely because they couldn't
create the knowledge to cope with
unforeseen challenges but when you look
at the world today David there's people
like you and many others in the
scientific and other communities who are
really driven by respect for science
respect for knowledge there are many
others and including people in power who
are not and it can seem that we may
forget the importance of our knowledge
and ignore it and um let go or blow up
or destroy much of the preciousness of
what we've built
is that a lens that you have what what
would you what are you most concerned
about as you look out at the world right
now well I think it is always been true
since the Renaissance since the
Scientific Revolution wherever you count
the beginning of our Enlightenment to be
it's it's always been true that most
people haven't appreciated it most
people have values that kind of
contradict it most people resent it a
bit so it has survived by being stable
in its own terms and when you start
referring to the political side of it
they're the equivalent of the Scientific
Revolution is liberal democracy or
whatever you want to call the values
that underlie Western political system
and this does seem especially the
anglo-sphere part of it does seem to be
incredibly stable if you look at the
early to mid 20th century the age of the
great dictators
totalitarian ideologies were sweeping
the world all the intellectuals in the
world were either fascists or Communists
well I'm exaggerating but many of them
were and in many countries
fascists and Communists took over the
government and caused all sorts of
damage and if they had won
they could easily have ended
civilization
but it's I think it's extremely
significant that not one of the
anglosphere countries fell to a
dictatorship
and when you say that democracy is the
kind of the political equivalent of
liberal democracies I guess the key
Point you're making there is that you
could think of a democracy a liberal
democracy as an error correcting system
that is actually the most fundamental
way to think of it it's not that it
automatically what it is yeah it doesn't
automatically create good what it does
is it weeds it eventually eventually
weeds out the bad and so if you imagine
human political Endeavor human endeavor
generally as this sort of a thousand
flowers flourishing and trying to grow
in different directions when some of
them start to grow in the wrong
direction a democratic system will reign
that and say sorry you've had your turn
you're out let's put someone else in and
try and grow differently yes peacefully
that's the thing because if it's not
done peacefully then knowledge is
destroyed in the war or in the Civil War
or whatever or in the coup that
overturns the previous regime the
political tradition is judged by whether
it can remove bad policies and bad
leaders peacefully
so when people worry today about uh
arise in demagoguery for example you're
you're reasonably confident that the
that the system yes error correction
mechanisms all kick into gear yes I'm
ABS yes I mean this is this this is uh I
mean I I can't say how little I am
concerned about that danger if if
civilization is going to be destroyed
it's not going to be destroyed by some
government taking power and then not
relinquishing it
that's not going to happen well that's
definitely encouraging and I think a lot
of people will be sitting there crossing
figures hoping you are right on that way
I mean I think you think of the realm of
the total amount of
knowledge and understanding out there is
essentially infinite right it's not like
there is we will discover the grand
equation and suddenly we'll know all of
science that we should rather think of
knowledge almost as this growing sphere
against the unknown and the more we know
the more we know we don't know is is
that the right way to think of it yes
yeah so uh as again Karl Popper put it
solving problems creates new problems
and therefore in our infinite ignorance
we are we are all alike so and the maybe
the reason why knowledge of the human
type has this infinite scope and could
take us you know across the Galaxy or
whatever and also you know down to
nanotechnology and all that is because
of the special relationship that human
Minds have with the laws of physics it's
this explanatory knowledge that human
minds are capable of that can
See Beyond
the visible so we can look up in the sky
and see a cold tiny dot of what looks
like cold white light and we know that
that is actually a star which means it's
actually a million miles across and it's
at 25 million degrees in its interior
and 6000 degrees on its surface and if
we went there we'd be fried to a crisp
so we can never experience it
at least not without special
technology and yet we can know about it
we can sit here and know about it in
enormous detail and in ever increasing
detail the reason that this is possible
as I said is because
human minds and explanatory knowledge
has a special relationship with the laws
of nature
so so
this seems implausible to a lot of
people a lot of people would say look
every species knows something a dog
knows that a bone tastes delicious but
it doesn't know scientific theory yeah
we we know a certain amount of
scientific theory but it's ridiculous to
imagine that we could know
um you know that there must be a whole
lot of things out there that we are
never even in principle capable of
understanding yeah and uh you you just
you dispute that why why yes why there
are two sides to that comparison you
know first you compare the dog with a
human and then you compare with a human
to the putative unknowable things that
there might be out there so there are
two steps there I've already explained
why the dog is inherently different from
us it's because the dog knows that the
bone tastes good because it's some of
its ancestors who didn't know that died
and the dog doesn't actually know
anything it's it's its genes know that
and there are certain types of things
that can become known that way but the
vast majority of things in the world in
the universe cannot become known that
way because the dog cannot try to eat
the Sun and be burned and you know that
kind of thing no one could gain the
knowledge of the Sun by that same method
now the other thing what if there was
knowledge out there with the things out
there that we couldn't possibly
understand well as a logical possibility
of course it's always possible
that there are incomprehensible things
in the universe but I have argued that
taking that seriously is exactly the
same as a belief in the Supernatural
because you could never have an
explanation of the form this thing that
can have an effect on us
can never be understood
because if it can have an effect we can
theorize about what causes the effect
and we can do an experiment to test the
theory and it's your belief that the
type of explanatory knowledge that we
have
can wrap around any imaginable
explanation that could be out there it's
not like there is there is sort of human
knowledge and then there might be some
knowledge that gods or fairies or
whatever have that is fundamentally
different and more profound or other
aliens could have so this makes me
wonder whether in your world view there
are similar liftoffs happening on other
planets out there
uh we don't know uh as you know there's
there's this problem of if there is
intelligent life
on other planets in the galaxy there are
many arguments that say we should have
seen them by now
this is called the Fermi Paradox
although I would rather call it the
Fermi problem because I didn't see
anything paradoxical about it
um Suppose there are just two
explanatory species
in the galaxy
then having reached the explanatory
takeoff like the Scientific Revolution
in the twinkling of an eye on the cosmic
scale we will have settled the whole
galaxy and uh the Galaxy exists on time
scales of billions of years so compared
with the age of the Galaxy the moment
from when humans first evolved to when
humans have settled the whole galaxy is
just a blink of an eye and therefore
the chances that to
civilizations emerge at the same time
is infinitesimal
so that means that if they exist they
must be millions of years ahead of us
and if their millions of years ahead of
us why aren't they here already because
the argument said that they would be
here already now
why would they not be here well there
are lots of reasons that first of all
one solution to the Fermi problem might
be that we are the first okay people
kind of reject that because it's kind of
boring you know
and why should we be so special well
someone had to be and and we kind of
reject that as a possibility because
there's no structure in that idea it is
there's there's nothing further to say
but it could be true like a load of
other things so the next possibility is
yes the the Galaxy is full of a
civilization and they're going to be
here soon
but I mean you believe that human
creativity is the fundamental part of
the whole knowledge liftoff and um the
aesthetic expression of that is
certainly a big part of who we are to me
one of the puzzles it's not that we
don't see spaceships coming it's that we
don't see any evidence of the Galaxy
having been engineered you know if
Dolphins were to make a breakthrough and
start developing periscopes that could
look up and examine the world around
them and they poke them up and looked at
the surface of the Earth then they would
see buildings and astonishing structures
that seemed to cry out for an
explanation that looked like they they
were the objects of intentional
construction we look out at the Galaxy
and uh and see nothing you think at the
very least you'd see some sort of um you
know some Stars had been converted into
spectacular artistic displays or there'd
be some evidence of of engineering the
fact that there's no evidence of
engineering suggests that the main game
in town out there is still the same old
physical processes that filled the prior
13 billion boring years so first of all
we haven't looked very carefully yet I
mean this kind of thing looking out for
for evidence of technology in other star
systems is only just beginning now and
we can only detect very powerful things
and I I don't think we should take for
granted that these type what although I
think we should take for granted that if
an intelligent species exists it will
colonize the Galaxy very quickly I don't
think we should take for granted that it
will enter this phase of type 1 type 2
type 3 Civilizations for the simple
reason that once your type 3
civilization what are you going to do
next
and suddenly they will be capable of
doing that but again like us
they will have to decide what to do
there would have to be a reason why they
go for for example enormously increased
power consumption they might not want
that I think the chances are they won't
want it because they will be information
based they will be entirely in virtual
reality except when they want to go out
into the physical world for some purpose
and they may not want to go very far
from each other because of the
communication difficulty unless again
unless there's a strong reason for it so
that strikes me as a really compelling
solution to the problem if you like
because based on your view what matters
when you have a knowledge liftoff is
knowledge and knowledge can be
encapsulated in many forms often which
can be vastly smaller even than the
biological forms in which we are now and
um like to me it's possible to imagine
um an alien species developing ever more
rich forms of creativity in ever smaller
spaces that the whole notion of physical
Conquest would become just an absurdly
old-fashioned notion of what made life
interesting it's like why bother to do
that when you have infinite control over
a much smaller structure of information
space that you can pattern in any way
you want and so there's that sort of
almost that conversion of the material
into the virtual that allows infinite
possibility right right there yes as a
Feynman said there's plenty of room at
the bottom there there are more like
orders of magnitude to explore
in on the microscopic world than there
are in the macroscopic world say across
the Galaxy and once you have a
civilization that is capable of
Interstellar travel and
extending down to the microscopic it's
not obvious what they will think best
from their point of view that the great
disadvantage of living in the galaxy
is not the size of it it's the time
it's it's the fact that you can't have a
coherent culture where the parts of it
are a hundred light years from each
other
right so right there that's a good
reason to theorize why growing
intelligence would want to actually go
smaller not not bigger so it's possible
that you're I'm still so taken with your
your um history of the universe of 12
billion years of boring presumably it's
compatible with what you've just said
that it might turn out not to be 12
billion years ago and there might be all
these spectacular takeoffs of
intelligence understanding knowledge in
different pockets of the Galaxy or of
the universe but just that um we don't
yet see that we're not yet exposed to
any of that of that history so yes there
might be uh I mean I I myself hope that
part of the morality of any advanced
civilization would be that they would
come and rescue us as soon as they found
out we exist but here's another
narrative that is compatible with what
we see which is that as a species takes
off and starts um developing knowledge
that
inevitably things go wrong at some point
that you know we inevitably create the
technology is capable of destroying us
and um it's either in the nature of the
Dynamics of power or in the just in the
nature of the Dynamics of complexity
that something horrifying eventually
goes wrong and these attempts that lift
off get wiped out
uh
so I'm sure that's not inevitable and
that's for exactly the same reason why
unlimited progress is not inevitable
if it were inevitable
that that means if it were true that
everywhere in the universe where there's
uh explanatory knowledge starts taking
off it will destroy itself within you
know say a thousand years that would be
a law of physics
so if you're going to postulate that
there's this law just in order to make
your nightmares come true you may as
well just have stuck with with believing
in in goblins and demons
although there is a sort of plausible
way of thinking about it just on Earth
level which is that as Technologies get
more powerful the stakes get ever higher
you know we have already invented
technologies that in principle you could
imagine it's not that long before a
single deranged student in a lab and
might be able to engineer a virus that
could really quickly spread and and um
you know take out the human race but
after staying you know invisible to
people while it cultures and spreads for
30 days and then suddenly boom it's
possible to imagine that knowledge
brings with it the potential for
unlimited destructive power and that um
as the sort of Humpty Dumpty theory of
you know it's it's
um it's easier to break things than to
make things
yes
um
of course that's a possibility because
if it wasn't a possibility then then
continued progress would be inevitable
which it isn't but the knowledge of how
to defend
civilization against existential threats
is also a form of knowledge which is
unlimited
so if we fail to create that knowledge
we're doomed if we do create that
knowledge we're not doomed that story is
the same as with all knowledge
so the possibility is there for us to
create it for as I put it for the good
guys to stay ahead of the bad guys but
also there is something
about the Bad actors that makes them
progress more slowly that is they are
enemies of civilization therefore they
are wrong right they are they uh and
therefore they have to be in a state of
mind that can tolerate being wrong and
therefore they can't tolerate a
tradition of criticism in fact
in with the realistic ones that you you
perhaps have in mind destroying the
tradition of criticism is the main their
main objective that's that's what their
grievances
so that makes them slower that makes
them inherently Trail the good guys but
that's just a tendency it it need not be
so that there could be a a breakthrough
by by some of the bad guys and that's
why I say we have a moral obligation to
stay ahead of them I mean that's a
beautifully optimistic um argument in a
way that there's such a thing as a
clever devil but not as a super clever
devil because because by being a devil
you're taking away the ability to be
truly clever in the long term you're
right yes I can't see any way out of
that argument it's it's got to be that
well I I love that I love that argument
um I hope that I truly hope that that
one works out I just want to ask you
this last question David which is if you
if you could implant in the minds of um
the good majority of people on this
planet a single idea what would that
idea be
I think it's got to be the idea of
optimism that all Evils are due to lack
of knowledge
wait wait wait wait wait wait wait wait
wait wait wait wait wait yes you so you
just give a definition of optimism there
that is not what most people think of as
autism most people think of optimism as
a feeling of Hope about the future your
definition is different because so
explain that well well hope that isn't
based on an explanatory theory is rather
I mean isn't it isn't that what they
call a vain hope yeah it's it's
whistling in the dark the optimism as I
Define it has to do with knowledge it's
not a prediction of the future it's an
explanation of failure if you explain
failure as being inevitable or due to
some malevolent Force insuperable
malevolent force or uh just the way
things are
then that's a recipe for stasis which is
the recipe for failure and eventually
death therefore I think that all failure
has to be explained in the form the
reason we didn't succeed is that we
didn't know how to
and the knowledge of how to
is in principle attainable
we don't have it now but we could have
it in the future if we do the right
thing
uh in fact it follows from this whole
conception of knowledge that we've been
talking about all this time
that optimism has to be true otherwise
there would be a limitation which would
mean the Supernatural and all that stuff
that the arguments are watertight all
the way from the scientific worldview to
optimism in my view so here's here's how
I
would distill this David Deutsch world
view which I have to say David I I find
quite an inspiring worldview so so here
we are this Homo Sapien you know we've
we've had this surprising moment of
liftoff where we're able to create new
knowledge new understanding but it's a
fragile thing it's full of Errors full
of mistakes yes yes if we could Inspire
everyone out there to adopt the mindset
that knowledge was precious and that
when things go wrong on our planet it's
not because there's some evil force
there that needs punching in the gut and
and spitting out it's it's just because
we we we're not understanding something
and and our job and our duty is to seek
to understand to look for those errors
to correct them and if we were to adopt
that mindset then
um there's there's literally no limit to
the journey that we can go on together a
journey of growing knowledge and
unlimited create creativity and kind of
like lives of Wonder and so forth I mean
that's that's what I take from you that
knowledge is not a thing for schools
libraries or whatever it's this
superpower that humans have developed if
they're willing to look at it the right
way well put I agree and we must also
expect to make lots of mistakes
so indeed it's not just you know but
just just knowing
because the problem is to create the
knowledge doesn't mean there's not an
automatic way of creating it in fact
it's conjectural we're going to make
many mistakes that's why we have to set
up institutions that can correct them
and some mistakes should be viewed as as
gifts in a way as long as you learn from
them and adjust as a result of them
they're a gift yes yes John Wheeler said
that our whole problem is to make the
mistakes as fast as possible
[Laughter]
you look after the world and we're
certainly getting that part right yeah
David Deutsch has been such a delight to
speak with you and I really thank you
for those many many hours of I know I
picture you you know in that home just
sitting there dreaming thinking puzzling
um the the what you have put together
from that I think is really remarkable
and I hope we can do this again David
thank you thank you so much I absolutely
love this nice talk speak with you nice
talking bye-bye for now bye then
foreign
this week's show was produced by Sharon
mashihi our associate producer is Kim
nativeane Peterson
special thanks to Helen Walters our show
is mixed by David Herman and our theme
music is by Alison Leighton Brown
in our next episode I sit down with Sam
Harris to discuss whether science can
answer moral questions the most
important questions in human life are
questions we have to be able to talk
about and we have a very large
proportion of humanity that is saying
okay these most important questions how
to live how to cause your children to
live and what to die for these are
questions that we're not willing to talk
about rationally
now if you enjoyed today's episode
please rate and review on Apple podcasts
or wherever you're listening or find
some other way of sharing with anyone
you know who is curious
thank you for listening